## Governance Structures {.page_break_before}

Effective data use traditionally starts not with, “what data do we have?” but instead with, “what hypothesis do we propose to explore?” 
The advent of machine learning adds to this, “what hypotheses are afforded by these data?” 
These two questions create specific local cases with wide and diverse requirements: what data to acquire, how to bring them into systems, how to store them, how to analyze them, how to share downstream knowledge. 

Because of this diversity, what is appropriate data handling in one project may not be appropriate in another. 
Notably, open approaches to data access do not consistently lead to their responsible and reliable reuse [@pasquetto2017]. 
This has made the process of data governance itself difficult to “open source” — simply giving away a clinical protocol, data management process, or metadata schema under an open source license does not ensure meaningful data reuse. 

Openness itself merits interrogation. 
A key requirement for data governance to consider in this context is: **what does “open” mean to different people, and different groups, over time**? 
Openness does not work for everyone, everywhere. 
Many groups traditionally under-represented in medical research have endured systemic, ongoing betrayals of trust in how data and samples are collected and used [@bardill2015]. 
These same groups are also often the least served by the medical systems, and the most surveilled by the state [@ferryman2018]. 
We must therefore design governance structures and governance design patterns that support the contextual desire to restrict data availability [@ross2018]. 
We must also develop the ability bring every group into governance designs, to explore when, how, and to whom they might be comfortable allowing access over time, and governance appropriate for those uses [@wilkins2020].

While research collaborations are unique, there are commonalities they share. 
At Sage Bionetworks, we have observed regular, relatively stable structures that work well over time. 
We will refer to these as **governance structures**. 

The major governance structures we have observed are the following:

- **Pairwise** (One-to-one): 
Two parties agree to work together and/or share on a data set in some fashion, typically with a closed contract or an informal agreement. 
The negotiation terms depend on the relative status of the parties and/or the value of the data and knowledge.
- **Open source** (One-to-many or some-to-many): 
Data are distributed for reuse with a license defining reuse rights and conditions. 
The creator is in charge of the negotiation at first (choice of license), but then rights to analyze and redistribute are permanently transferred to the user. 
This is typical of a centralized project in the sciences, i.e., the Human Genome Project. [@collins2003]
- **Federated Query** (Many-to-many, via platform): 
Data are housed in a variety of locations, and users are able to query to those local data simultaneously. 
Typically restricted to pre-configured queries (rather than data exploration) and may require registration before use [@schwarte2011].
- **Trusted research environment** (Many-to-some): 
Data are housed in a central location under a contractual regime including data transfer and use agreements. 
Users apply to use the data. 
Users must “visit” the data rather than download them, agree to be known, and, in some cases, agree to be surveilled by a data steward [@lane2007].
- **Model-to-data** (One-to-many): 
Data are held by a steward who is responsible for running algorithms on the behalf of researchers. 
In some cases, a synthetic version of the data may be released openly to facilitate model training. 
Researchers develop algorithms, send them to the steward, and receive back output of their analysis as run on the real dataset. 
The variety of analyses that may be performed is restricted by this structure, because the data steward must ensure data are specifically curated for any analytical question at hand [@guinney2018].
- **Open citizen science** (Many-to-many): 
Rights to use and distribute data are often fully decentralized via license or contract. 
Open citizen science is a peer-to-peer version of open source science [@greshake2019].
- **Clubs and Trusts** (Some-to-some): 
This is a common version of collaboration in biomedical research. 
Clubs [@ostrom2010] and Trusts [@mcdonald2019] are versions of a common pool resource: a group of people and/or institutions who agree to share resources towards a common goal. 
Control over the development and negotiation of data sharing and use terms is often held by the founders / settlers (and/or funders) and then can be distributed amongst club participants [@ostrom2010]. 
Importantly, **clubs that operate in the cloud can easily publish data products that are more “open” than the club itself**. 
- **Closed**: 
Data are held privately by a single party. 
- **Closed and Restricted**: 
Data are held privately in order to protect a population, meet a legal requirement, or protect a secret.

| **Governance structure** | Number and linkage of parties | Degree of data Availability | Degree of freedom to use data | Challenges common to the governance success | Primary governance design pattern |
| ----- | ----- | ----- | ----- | ----- | ----- |
| **Pairwise** | One-to-one | Medium/High | Medium/High | Uneven status of parties, value of data | Informal or closed contract |
| **Open Source** | One/some-to-many | High | High | Rights permanently granted to user | License |
| **Federated Query** | Many-to-many, via platform | High | Medium/Low | Defection of creators | Contract and club rules |
| **Trusted Research Environment** | One/some-to-many | Medium/Low | Medium/Low | Users agree to be known, surveilled | Data transfer and use agreements |
| **Model-to-Data** | One-to-many | High | Low | Not all who apply can use data | Restricted analyses, data curation |
| **Open Citizen Science** | Many-to-many | High | High | Capacity for analysis is uneven | Contract or license |
| **Clubs, Trusts** | Some-to-some | Medium/Low | High | Easy to create things governed more liberally. Trusteeship can be revoked. | Club / Trust rules |
| **Closed** | Many (to none) | Low | High | Fundamental limits to collaboration | Public laws, security protocols |
| **Closed and Restricted** | Some (to none) | Low | Low | Fundamental limits to collaboration | Public laws, security protocols |

Table: Governance structures and their attributes
{#tbl:structures}

How many parties are involved, who is in charge of the negotiation, how significantly are the data regulated or the sensitive nature of the data — these are all attributes that can be used to characterize the governance structure. 
From the many potential attributes, we choose to organize governance structures by a) how broadly available they are — the total potential size of the user base — and b) how many freedoms a user has to freely use and distribute the data. 

These two attributes are “upstream” from decisions such as which license to use, and form a pair of axes on which to orient structural governance analysis. 
These attributes provide a standardized form to describe governance structures in which one, some, or many parties either provide or use data, and the freedom to use and distribute data is variable. 

![
Governance structures and their relationship types, by relative amounts of availability and freedom
](images/figure1.png){#fig:fig1 width="80%"}

-----

![
Governance structure and process flow for pairwise collaborations
](images/figure2.png){#fig:fig2 width="80%"}

-----

![
Governance structure and process flow for open source collaborations
](images/figure3.png){#fig:fig3 width="80%"}

-----

![
Governance structure and process flow for federated query
](images/figure4.png){#fig:fig4 width="80%"}

-----

![
Governance structure and process flow for model-to-data
](images/figure5.png){#fig:fig5 width="80%"}

-----

![
Governance structure and process flow for trusted researcer environment
](images/figure6.png){#fig:fig6 width="80%"}

Governance structures are abstractions, not turnkey solutions that we can provide to would-be collaborators, whether open or closed. 
These structures are most useful to orient data collaborations: do we want a club, or a trusted environment? 
By asking these questions about how available data will be, and how much freedom a user will have to analyze and distribute, we can quickly identify the goals of the collaborating parties and move into drafting contract structures. 

These structures employ governance design patterns: standard contracts and contractual language, user interfaces, teaching toolkits, and software templates. 
**These patterns can be assembled into a governance structure faster than drafting from scratch, while leveraging legal rigor of past work for regulated or protected data collaboration**.

![
Decisions about governance should start with research goals and nature of collaboration, then move to what structure and design elements are needed.
](images/figure7.png){#fig:fig7 width="80%"}

