## Governance Design Patterns {.page_break_before}

Like templates for building a spreadsheet or website, **governance design patterns are generalizable solutions for common challenges and decision points in collaboration**.

Governance design patterns are often not finished products that can be transformed directly into contract. 
Any real-life governance structure will combine nuances about specific data transfer and use with existing design patterns such as standards, toolkits, reference implementations, process knowledge, and pedagogy. 
Governance design patterns themselves must often be customized, or "filled out," from their default forms. 
Authors of these design patterns can build maps of what kinds of governance design patterns work well with each other, which don’t, and which, in turn, serve as inputs into new design patterns.

### Types of Governance Design Patterns

Data collaborations in biomedical research often feature scientists negotiating legal language directly. 
Their selection, combination, and application of legal terms is often ad-hoc, often leading to missing language, conflicting language, or misinterpretation. 
Standardizing contract language patterns and defining their interactions creates a common language for governance early in collaborations. 
And there is precedent, as the CORE platform hosts a large and growing library of reusable resources [@torous2017] as design patterns.

More importantly, standard, yet customizable, reusable language creates multiple benefits. 
Such language is not biased to anyone in the negotiation, meets legal and ethical norms and requirements often missed by unskilled negotiators, and supports descriptive annotations to facilitate understanding. 
Standard language also supports automated data governance regimes such as machine review of data use agreements [@dyke2016].

Therefore, **the primary governance design pattern at Sage Bionetworks is legal language, usually (but not exclusively) situated inside a contract or a license**. 
Other patterns include teaching toolkits and user interfaces.

There is a wide range of promising areas to explore for establishing standard governance designs and their constituent design patterns. 
We review these areas here.

#### Licenses and Agreements

**Licenses, contractual agreements, and regulatory documents** can be standard documents, standard paragraphs to be inserted into custom documents, or templates with significant content filled in by the users.

| Design Pattern | Description | Example |
| ----- | ----- | ----- |
Open license | A license or contract which contains provisions that allow other individuals to reuse data with specific freedoms and conditions. Connected to intellectual property laws. | Creative Commons [@ccndb], Open Database License [@okf2009a], Microsoft Open Use of Data Agreement [@microsoft2020] |
| Data use agreement | An agreement that allows use of restricted data in a specific way. Connected to health privacy laws. | Health Care Systems Network Data Use Agreement Toolkit [@hcsn2020] |
| Data transfer agreement | An agreement that allows transfer of data from one party to another not associated with the first party under certain terms and conditions. Connected to data protection laws. | European Commission Standard Contractual Clauses [@ec2020], Uniform Biological Materials Transfer Agreement [@autm2019] |
| Data processing addendum | Standard contractual clauses for transfer between data controllers and data processors. Relevant in GDPR transfers as well as emerging state legislation in the US [@hahn2019]. | IAPP Sample Addendum Addressing Article 28 GDPR and Incorporating Standard Contractual Clauses for Controller to Processor Transfers of Personal Data [@iapp2020] |
| Public domain | A declaration that no intellectual property rights exist in a data set or database. | Creative Commons CC0 [@ccnda], Public Domain Database License [@okf2009b] |

Table: Licenses and agreements
{#tbl:licensesAgreements}

#### Data Collection and Ingest Mechanisms

Data has to be ingested into systems, so that it can be connected to other data, analytic framework, backup, and encryption. 
The **data ingest design patterns typically take the form of standard paragraphs that are used in contracts, filings (such as clinical protocols), and other legal documents**. 

For example, in a memorandum of understanding, each side might specify which technical standards will be used in which parts of the project, or one side might ask the other to assert a level of cybersecurity that meets federal standards. 

Depending on the data type, regulations may require informed consent, simple consent, and compliance with state and national data protection laws. 
These legal documents execute a basic set of functions: gathering permission from a person to take in their data into a research study, cloud platform, business, and applications. 
Broadly standard language dominates consumer terms of service and privacy policy, with outright cut-and-paste common from website to website. 
A primary goal of most of these documents is to insulate the collector from liability and the resulting documents are complex, lawyer-oriented, difficult to understand, and non-negotiable. 
Thus the need for user interfaces to explain data collection is increasingly accepted, with user experience designs demonstrating impact in informed consent and privacy policies [@moore2020]. 

| Design Pattern | Description | Example |
| ----- | ----- | ----- |
| Clinical protocol | A written plan for how a health condition, drug, or device is to be studied and the procedure to be followed by the study, including technology. Connected to international and national laws in bioethics. | CDISC Clinical Trial Protocol Representation Model [@cdisc2020], NIH Protocol Templates for Clinical Trials [@nih2019] |
| Informed consent | Standard language and user interfaces that have been vetted through legal and ethical review for specific types of data, e.g. health records or DNA | Sage Bionetworks Elements of Informed Consent [@sage2020b], GA4GH Model Consent Clauses [@dyke2016] |
| Privacy policy | Standard language and user interfaces that have been vetted through legal and ethical review for apps and websites that collect user data | Sage Bionetworks Privacy Toolkit [@sage2020a] |
| Terms of service | Standard language and user interfaces that have been vetted through legal review for apps and websites that collect user data | Various auto-contract systems e.g. Formswift [@formswift2020], LegalZoom [@legalzoom] |

Table: Data collection mechanisms
{#tbl:collectionMechanisms}

#### User qualification mechanisms

**Data analysis governance design patterns center around how a given project admits users**. 
While closed projects don’t allow user admission at all (an anti-pattern), a broad range of scientific and consumer data holders use access committee review to decide when and if to allow a new usage of data. 
Committees traditionally perform both positive review (“does this researcher meet the minimum requirements?”) and normative review (“is this use worthy?”) [@cheah2020]. 
More recently, major biomedical collaborations began testing how broad usage rights granted objectively to users might work, especially in cloud computing [@nih2020a].

| Design Pattern | Description | Example |
| ----- | ----- | ----- |
| Data Access Committee (DAC) | A committee, whether a formal or informal group of individuals, with the responsibility of reviewing and assessing data access requests. Many individual groups, consortiums, institutional and independent DACs have been established but there is currently no widely accepted framework for their organization and function | dbGAP [@ncbi2020] |
| Ethics and Regulatory Review Boards | A formal accredited committee with the responsibility of reviewing and assessing research involving human beings [@mazur2007]. Research institutions and governments typically run their own review boards, while for profit and other independent review boards provide the same services for a fee to the public. These boards review clinical protocols, informed consent forms, and other study related material. | AllofUs Research Program Institutional Review Board [@nih2020b], WCG-WIRB [@wirb2020] |
| Qualified Researcher | A process by which researchers can apply to use data with a range of conditions and freedoms. Reconstructs some functionality of open licenses while allowing data download [@grayson2019]. | mPower Qualified Researcher Release [@wilbanks2016] |
| Data Passport | A process by which researchers can apply for general permission to do exploratory analysis of data with wide freedoms. Reconstructs some functionality of open licenses, which typically prohibits data download [@nih2020c] . | AllofUs Research Program Data Access Framework [@nih2020a] |
| Registration | Data are available to users who complete a registration process and agree to terms of service. Can be used to construct a non commercial offering. | Catalog of Somatic Mutations in Cancer (COSMIC) [@wellcome2020] |
| Open Download | Data are available on the public internet with no restrictions beyond those required to gain access to the internet and norms of attribution. | SyntheticMass FHIR Dataset [@walonoski2018], Center for Medicare Services dataset downloads [@uscmms2020] |

Table: User qualification mechanisms
{#tbl:userQual}

#### Mathematical governance mechanisms

A variety of technical approaches can constitute governance design patterns. 
De-identification is perhaps the oldest mathematical design pattern, and is incorporated into laws such as HIPAA as a key pattern of data governance. 
**New mathematical approaches hold promise to enable extremely broad availability and freedom at low risk**, but can be computationally expensive on enormous data sets in comparison to other forms of governance.

| Design Pattern | Description | Example |
| ----- | ----- | ----- |
| De-identification | Language in which two or more parties agree to use either removal of fields or mathematical techniques to achieve a standard of de-identification. Typically inserted into larger governance contracts. | De-identification sample clauses [@lawinsider2020] , HHS Sample Business Associate Agreements [@usdhhs2008] |
| Blockchain | Language by which two or more parties agree to use an open, distributed, permanent ledger to broker transactions and data use. | Accord project template studio [@accord2019], European Commission Feasability Study [@ec2020-2] |
| Homomorphic encryption | Language in which two or more parties agree to use encryption that allows computation on distributed storage and computation while preserving privacy. Most use so far in emerging smart contracts regimes [@nugent2016]. | N/A |
| Differential privacy | Language by which two or more parties agree to publicly expose information about a dataset by describing patterns in the dataset without disclosing data about individuals. Most implementations cluster in technical projects [@opendiff], with little standard contract language available. | N/A |

Table: Mathematical governance mechanisms
{#tbl:mathGov}

#### Data Type

Data type — the kind of data in use — defines much of the universe of a collaboration structure. 
Regulation, legislation, civil rights, norms, and contracts are tied to specific kinds of data, such as electronic health records and DNA, which are in turn tied to specific kinds of risks like privacy attacks [@bonomi2020].
Data types are most often negotiated among collaborators, and are easiest to see inside technical standards, file formats, transactions, and more. 
They are not themselves governance design patterns, although design patterns will make many references to them.

In our work at Sage Bionetworks, we most often deal with data about DNA and related biological processes, “real world” data we collect about people’s health through their phones and wearables, and electronic health records. 
There is also a vast universe of consumer data available under private contract, such as credit card or grocery data. 

### Pre-Existing Governance Design Patterns

We know that standard contract language can have an impact in areas outside of data governance. 
The Federal Demonstration Partnership (FDP), a 35-year-old cooperative initiative among 10 federal agencies and 154 institutional recipients of federal funds, implemented a vast set of standard governance documents to help groups form, apply for, and share federal funding, and report back on the collaboration outcomes [@fdp2020]. 
An early FDP survey found that of the time that faculty committed to federal research, 42 percent was devoted to administrative activities rather than research. 
Researchers indicated that “grant progress-report submissions, personnel hiring, project-revenue management, equipment and supply purchases, IRB protocols and training, training personnel and students, and personnel evaluations” were the top drains on research time [@decker2007].

The FDP years ago created what we — in this paper — call governance design patterns.
Negotiations using the FDP contracts can be orders of magnitude simpler and faster because **the standard design patterns can create trust and equality among negotiators**, rather than lawyer-to-lawyer negotiation. 
However, a 2018 survey found a slight increase in time spent on administrative activity despite the FDP’s existence [@schneider2019]. 
This increase may be connected to the lack of support for researchers at institutions implementing negotiations [@michel2019]. 
Thus design patterns themselves will not solve the problem: **governance needs implementation, hiring, funding, and support to succeed**. 

The FDP is joined by the SMART IRB platform funded by NIH, which eases challenges associated with initiating multisite research and provides a roadmap for institutions to implement the NIH Single IRB Review policy. 
Clinical protocols and consent forms often reuse language from previous projects, replicating the problem of defending past approaches whether or not they meet the current issue. 
This creates similar value to standardized neutral language intended for customization, i.e., design patterns. 
Like the FDP, SMART IRB demonstrates the value of legal tools at the design pattern level in contracts and negotiation. 
This finding is replicated in the design of informed consent for national research studies.

We know from the FDP and SMART IRB examples that the standardization of language and process can ease the burden of drafting contracts for co-writing grants or for regulatory paperwork. 
But **there is no similar unifying effort for governance design patterns (including, but not limited to legal language) in data-sharing governance**. 
Nor is there sufficient recognition of the complexity of implementing these tools in practice. 
As the 2018 FDP survey found, simplifying the language does not automatically ease the administrative burden. 

### Transitioning Data Across Governance Structures

Because we believe that open science makes for better science, **we work to promote governance structures and design patterns that support data sharing in a manner that is as open as possible**. 
But as we note above, not all data can or should be shared openly at all times.

We see value in exploring how data generated within one governance structure can migrate from a more closed context to a more open one. 
This allows us to define a more closed data use context for a small group of users, and export information and data to a more open structure as a form of publication. 
This balance is often impossible to achieve in a single governance structure: patterns that lead to reuse and patterns that lead to protection create internal conflict. 
The solution is to develop a program that uses a different design pattern for management of digital assets developed across the project lifecycle and/or to design a process that migrates certain data from one governance structure to the other under the right conditions. 
_**These transitions can create balance between very real needs to protect data during analysis and the very real opportunities that can come from increased access to data**_. 

Our first example provided a different governance structure for sharing of data vs. sharing of analytical outputs. 
In this case, a private, pre-competitive group of cancer researchers working together on genetic subtypes for colorectal cancer perceived that sharing data with one another was worth the risk, but publishing the data — or the algorithms they build with that data — onto the public internet, under an open license, was not [@guinney2015]. 
This project used a club structure to enable data sharing so that each researcher could develop their algorithm with the extended set of data but, in exchange, the group retained the right to compare those algorithms and develop a consensus model that could be published openly. 
This shift in design patterns supports a transition from club to open structure for key digital assets in a manner that balances the public benefit of the collective wisdom with the private incentives of the individual researchers. 

![
Transitioning from one governance structure to another requires transitioning from one governance design pattern to another.
](images/figure8.png){#fig:fig8 width="80%"}

A second example illustrates a shift from a trusted environment to an open structure for data sharing over time. 
The Accelerating Medicines Partnership for Alzheimer’s Disease, a public private partnership between the US NIH and the pharmaceutical industry, engaged academic and pharmaceutical industry researchers in a pre-competitive program to identify new drug targets in Alzheimer’s from multi-omic brain data. 
The researchers agreed to share data, algorithms and outcomes with each other immediately upon data generation — and to periodically migrate those assets into the public domain upon a pre-specified schedule (ADknowledgeportal.org).

In a third example, the Breast Cancer Surveillance Consortium and the Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai had a database of 640,000 mammograms. 
Wondering if machine learning might provide assistance to, or even match, expert radiologists, they hoped to convene a computational contest. 
But the data had not been consented for either high freedom or high availability, and bore risks of re-identification of the patients represented by the data. 
Beyond that, the scale of the data made broad access to it computationally and economically expensive. 
This required an analysis structure that was tightly controlled, but some form of data distribution that was liberal enough to support hundreds of data users [@seyednasrollah2017].

By creating a synthetic form of the data set — which could be downloaded widely, as it does not represent real people — a wide set of analysts could use this data to inform algorithm development. 
Acting as a steward, Sage Bionetworks could then run models on behalf of the submitters and return results and feedback to allow for model tuning, iteration, and development. 
This transition of synthetic data from the model-to-data structure to open data kept an “air gap” around the real data to protect its privacy, but allowed hundreds of users worldwide to build algorithms [@guinney2018].

### Illustrative use cases

The COVID19 pandemic has forced an unprecedented spike in scientific data collaboration. 

Our approach of using governance design patterns to rapidly build desired governance structures has, so far, performed well under time pressure. 
We illustrate here two use cases, the National COVID Cohort Collaborative and the COVID Recovery Corps, to demonstrate how we could stand up two different projects in less than two months without sacrificing legal quality or ethical rigor. 

#### National COVID Cohort Collaborative (N3C)

The National COVID Cohort Collaborative (N3C) is a collaboration among 60 grant-receiving clinical centers and their partners, 5 pre-existing distributed health data networks, the NIH’s National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences (NCATS), and the pre-existing National Center for Data To Health project (CD2H). 
The N3C’s goal is to enable detailed data analysis of clinical records for COVID patients for a wide variety of users while preserving individual privacy of patients.

Formed rapidly in response to the outbreak of the pandemic, the N3C is assembling relevant electronic health record data of COVID-19 patients from participating institutions. 
The data live in a secure analytical environment where tools and algorithms can be rapidly evaluated, and clinicians and researchers can ask granular and complex clinical questions. 
Additionally, the same data will drive a synthetic data set available for broad download and reuse, and partners will expose their data for pre-written federated queries. 

As members of the CD2H project, Sage Bionetworks governance leaders chose a suite of governance structures and transition: first, a club managed by NCATS into which data flows from the many data owners. 
Second, the N3C creates a range of transitions for data. Some users sign a data use agreement to get into the “real” data set, others to run federated queries. 
Synthetic data will be available for registered download. 
The entire process is run through a single ethical review board at Johns Hopkins University under SMART IRB.

By using governance structures and design patterns, the N3C was able to move governance rapidly while retaining high quality. 
Within two months of launch, the N3C protocol passed review at Johns Hopkins, more than 37 institutions have signed the single data transfer agreement, and data access is already in testing. 
Our governance aims to enable the project to achieve its goals to improve the efficiency and accessibility of analyses with COVID-19 clinical data, expand our ability to analyze and understand COVID, and demonstrate a novel approach for collaborative pandemic data sharing.

![
How N3C Data Governance is Structured.
](images/figure9.png){#fig:fig9 width="80%"}

#### COVID Recovery Corps (CRC)

The Covid Recovery Corps (CRC) is a collaborative research study by Columbia University and Sage Bionetworks, supported by the Chan Zuckerberg Initiative. 
The CRC aims to enroll people from the New York City metro area and have recovered from COVID-19 to partner with scientists to better understand the recovery process and long term effects from the disease.

Some patterns of the CRC are stable governance design patterns: it’s a research study feeding data into a club under clinical protocols and using informed consent. 
The study also launches with a 50,000 person Facebook community, anticipates national at-home testing, and its protocol must contemplate cities other than New York joining the protocol as new “nodes” on a clinical network. 

Using governance structures and design patterns, less than 50 days elapsed between kickoff meetings and IRB approval for the project.

![
How CRC Data Governance is Structured.
](images/figure10.png){#fig:fig10 width="80%"}

### Governance and Design In Context

Our approach in this Green Paper sits within a broader movement to apply human-centered design to policy. 
The concepts of structures and patterns will be familiar to designers. 
Part of our argument is that governance needs design, and that designers should embrace governance as a topic area.

A well-designed governance system must center empathy for those using it, and frame the design work in terms of their experience of use. 
While governance creation often starts with desired outcome (e.g., “more fairness” or “more ethics” or “faster outcomes” or “collaboration formed”) it is rare that those outcomes include or articulate aspects of the lived experience of technology-based biology/data science. 
Designing governance systems for data science, like other digital services, should begin by exploring and pinpointing the needs of the people who will use the service, and the ways the service will fit into their lives.

One helpful tool for human-centered design is the persona. 
Based on interviews with a wide variety of users to understand their views and experiences, it is possible to derive a handful of patterns in the types of users, each augmented with vivid details — a name, picture, personal history, etc — to conjure an image of the person being designed for. 
Personas provide user archetypes that capture the essentials and are easy to recall and reference throughout the design process. 
In the context of data use, personas could allow us to test a governance feature with respect to the needs of a variety of stakeholders in open science.

Scenarios represent another tool. 
Like a persona, a scenario is an artifice that is based on empirical research, analysis of patterns, and synthesis of attributes, embellished with colorful, memorable details to aid in functionality. 
However, instead of creating a set of hypothetical people, we are creating a set of hypothetical contexts in which they would act. 
Like personas, scenarios define the space of the possible, and are useful only as a set (not individually) to explore the robustness of particular options. 
Also, a hallmark of human-centered design is frequent, rapid, iterative prototyping, which incorporates user feedback back into the design process as often as possible. 
Testbeds to enable frequent, rapid, iterative prototyping and integrate user feedback are another often overlooked, but entirely necessary, component of the governance enterprise. 
