## Acknowledgments

We are grateful to Microsoft for supporting this paper, particularly Nicolas Schifano and Katherine Spelman. 

This paper would not exist without the Sage Bionetworks team. 
Christine Suver contributed enormously to the governance structures described here, and Megan Doerr’s work on informed consent and data governance is woven throughout (and thanks for a careful review). 
Vanessa Barone’s work with Woody MacDuffie on the Privacy Toolkit contributed the key concept of design patterns. 
Sarah Moore and Victoria Allen’s work on the AllofUs Research Program represents an ongoing test of the models described here. 
And Stephen Friend was a constant early inspiration and collaborator for innovation in governance structures. 

Justin Guinney provided the crucial first draft of the first figures of this paper.
Brian Bot took the static content of this green paper and translated it into a living document via manubot and hosted on GitHub to enable future community contributions and critiques.

We would also like to thank Eva Barbarossa, John Chaffins, Stephanie Devaney, Jesse Dylan, Ruth Faden, Kadija Ferryman, David Fore, Nancy Kass, Bartha Knoppers, Sean McDonald, Jasmine McNealy, Michelle Meyer, Camille Nebeker, Stephanie Nguyen, Adrian Thorogood, Jennifer Wagner, and Joon-Ho Yu for ongoing conversations that contributed to this paper.

We also thank Academy Health, which provided the first grant ever to the Governance team at Sage.

All mistakes are ours.

## References {.page_break_before}

<!-- Explicitly insert bibliography here -->
<div id="refs"></div>
